---
layout: post
title: HPC series 4 - OpenACC practice
date: 2024-09-14
Author: Yanfei Tang
tags: [HPC, gpu, OpenACC]
comments: false
toc: false
---

&emsp;&emsp; Previously, we discussed about the CUDA language to increase performance of code by GPU. We give a very simple example to acceralte code of drawing a Mandelbrot graph. However, even for this simple example, it required quite efforts. Therefore, programmer desire the ability to apply with a familiar, high level programming model that provide both high performace and simpilicity. OpenACC is a programming model that uses high-level compiler directives to parallel the code for a variety of hardware accelerators. This post gives some examples to use OpenACC in practice.

<!-- more -->

### The OpenACC Accelerator Model

The OpenACC accelerator model is an add-on device model. The OpenACC offload both the computation and data from a host device to an accelerator device. Typically, the host device contains CPU and DDR momery. While, the accelerator device is normally a GPU and GPU memories. Broadly speaking, OpenACC does support the same archtecture for both the host and device. 




### Performance of matrix operators of numerical library on platforms

More information about the matrix operators' performance in CuPy can be found in this reference[^1].



[^1]: https://openacc-best-practices-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html

[^2]: Robey, R., & Zamora, Y. (2021). Parallel and high performance computing. Simon and Schuster.