---
layout: post
title: Tips about Linux and Programming
date: 2022-12-08
Author: Yanfei Tang
tags: [杂文]
comments: false
---

&emsp;&emsp; Some useful tips about Linux commands, programming skills and else. I am continuing add these tips to save my bad memory. 😂

<!-- more -->

# Linux Commands

#### grep

[Find all files containing specific text (string) on Linux](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/16956810/how-to-find-all-files-containing-specific-text-string-on-linux)

```bash
grep -rnw '/path/to/somewhere' -e 'pattern'
```

- <code>-r</code> or <code>-R</code> is recursive,
- <code>-n</code> is line number, and
- <code>-w</code> stands for match the whole word.
- <code>-l</code> (lower-case L) can be added to just give the file name of matching files.
- <code>-e</code> is the pattern used during the search

Along with these, <code>--exclude</code>, <code>--include</code>, <code>--exclude-dir</code> flags could be used for efficient searching:

- This will only searching through those files which have .c or .h extensions:

```bash
grep --include=\*.{c,h} -rnw '/path/to/somewhere/' -e "pattern"
```

- This will exclude searching all the files ending with .o extension:

```bash
grep --exclude=\*.o -rnw '/path/to/somewhere/' -e "pattern"
```

- For directories it's possible to exclude one or more directories using the <code>--exclude-dir</code> parameter. For example, this will exclude the dirs <code>dir1/</code>, <code>dir2/</code> and all of them matching <code>*.dst/</code>:

```bash
grep --exclude-dir={dir1,dir2,*.dst} -rnw '/path/to/search/' -e "pattern"
```





# Programming





# Message Passing Interface

I take the tips from the website [mpitutorial](https://mpitutorial.com/tutorials/mpi-hello-world/).

```c++
MPI_Init(int* argc, char** argv)
```

During <code>MPI_Init</code>, all of MPI's global and internal variables are constructed. For example, a communicator is formed around all of the processes that were spawned, and unique ranks are assigned to each process.

```C++
MPI_Comm_size(MPI_Comm communicator, int* size)
```

<code>MPI_Comm_size</code> returns the size of a communicator. For example, 

```C++
MPI_Comm_size(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &world_size);
```

<code>MPI_COMM_WORLD</code> encloses all of the processes in the job. Therefore, this call should return the amount of processes that were requested for the job.

```C++
MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_Comm communicator, int* rank)
```

 <code>MPI_Comm_rank</code> returns the rank of a process in a communicator. Each process inside of a communicator is assigned an incremental rank starting from **zero**. 

A miscellaneous and less-used function is:

```C++
MPI_Get_processor_name(char* name, int* name_length)
```

<code>MPI_Get_processor_name</code> obtains the actual name of the processor on which the process is executing. 

```C++
MPI_Finalize()
```

<code>MPI_Finalize()</code> is used to clean up the MPI environment. No more MPI calls can be made after this one.
