---
layout: post
title: Holbrooke's interview transcript
date: 2022-07-21
Author: Yanfei Tang
tags: [杂文]
comments: false
---

&emsp;&emsp;It is almost unanimously agreed that the most influential person on my father's generation and my generation is Deng Xiaoping. I am always fascinated by Deng's military and political journey. I highly  recommend  to read Ezra F. Vogel's book *Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China*. However, this post is not about some reviews about the book, but other online visual and vocal materials about Deng. Charlie Rose's interview program 60 minutes is a household name in the United States. After Deng's death, the production group made a talk show about Deng. This blog is about some records about this [interview](https://charlierose.com/videos/7351). Among this inteview, I like Richard Holbrooke's meticulous comments a lot, therefore I record here as a reference.

<!-- more -->

**Charlie Rose**: One man in America who knew Deng Xiaoping, knew him well over a period of seven years, assistant secretary for far east affairs in Carter administration and as a private citizen, spent many times in China talking to him, is here now to assess the historical significance of Deng Xiaoping and I'm pleased to have him back on the broadcast. Richard Holbrooke, welcome back ~

**Richard Holbrooke**: It's great to be here, Charlie.

**Charlie Rose**: You said to me *a great historical figure* 

**Richard Holbrooke**: Oh, no question. Why? There are very few people in this century of whom it can be said that they made a difference like Deng Xiaoping. He opened China up to the world. He increased the per capita income of one quarter of the world's population by a factor of three. He -- . All the things that we see on the television today, the beauty contests, the economy, the-- even the Tiananmen demonstrations, which he crushed, were a result of his opening. He was a great man, other than Nelson Mandela, probably the most extraordinary living person in the world up to his death. Over the last two or three years he had faded from leadership, but his presence still hung over China. He did everything he set out to do when he returned to power in 1978 after three purges, the first one in the 1930s, two during the Cultural Revolution.  He did everything he set out to do to make China a great nation again except one thing. He couldn't manage the transition from a full communist dictatorship to a more open society without tremendous political repression at the end. And this will be a cloud over his otherwise extraordinary achivement. 

**Charlie Rose**: Now, do you think he would have the same view?

**Richard Holbrooke**: He -- I -- Deng Xiaoping, we must remeber,  was born under the empress dowager. He lived the life of the century. He was a founding member of the party. He was in France with communists. He did the Long March. He survived the most intrigue-filled battles within the party. He was up, down, up, down and up again. And the fought through the civil war as commander of the 8th New Routh Army. wrested power from the Gang of Four. And he believed -- I'm certain of this, having watched him. He believed life was a struggle. When you talked to him about deaths caused by problems, he waved them away. When he talked about Vietnamese, whom he hated with a passion, he would shake with emotion and he would say, "We will fight Vietnamese, We don't care if we die. We must do it" He -- he -- therefore, he would disagree fundamentally with what I just said because to him and to all Chinese leaders of his generation -- and they're now gone -- life was a perpetual struggle. They had seen more deaths and probably contributed to them than any imaginable leader.  

**Charlie Rose**: What did he believe was China'a destiny? 

**Richard Holbrooke**: His -- that's very easy question to answer. He believed China's destiny was to be a great nation again and he, when he regained power in 1978, at the age of 75, he set out to make it happen. And he pretty well did it. 

**Charlie Rose**: Why did he hold onto power until his 90s? Why not give it up? 

**Richard Holbrooke**: Well

**Charlie Rose**:  Why not? encourage -- 

**Richard Holbrooke**: Yeah. Well, that's a fascinating question. China has not had a peaceful and orderly transition of power in a century. He didn't believe that China was capable of orderly transitions, so he held onto power, stepped gradually back from the front ranks, put in his first set of proteges in the early '80s, both of them fell, and brought second group of proteges who were tougher and stepped back again. Then he reopened the economy in the south with his famous last visit to Shenzhen Special Zone and then he stepped back again. But he let go very gradually because he was desperate to prevent China from going back into a period of turmoil. (Go ahead). But the jury is out. I want to be clear. Most officials will now say to you today that the transition already occurred. But you know something? We don't know. Transition really had two phases -- the last two or three years, when they jockeyed while he was still alive, now new phase. Jiang Zemin is already in his early 70s. He will be the leader, but he doesn't have this historic power, with his roots in the party, the bureaucracy and the army. Deng is the last Chinese who had a three-power basis. And therefore power will defuse at the center in Beijing. Power will defuse to the provinces. The entry of Hong Kong into China will create a new money center in Hong Kong and I would like to stress that no matter how calm it will be now -- and there's not going to be any criss now -- there will be an evolution to a historic new destiny for China and nobody can predict it. 

**Charlie Rose**: And you don't have any idea what it's going to be. Because the forces at work. 

**Richard Holbrooke**: What did Napoleon say? "When China awakes, it will shake the world." China is awake and China's future is great strategic question mark hanging over Asia. Deng's vision was clearly understood. Since 1978, when Carter and he began the dialogue which Mike Oksenberg and I were privileged to be part of, we knew Deng's vision. It held for an extraordinary 19 years. But now a new vision must replace it. And I want to stress the people Deng picked as his successors can't stick around too long. They're too old. And the next generation is an uncertain group of people. 

**Charlie Rose**: Does the United States know who these leaders are, this next generation? And do we have contacts at level of assistant secretary to assistant secretary over there, in the level of Pentagon to a general over there?

**Richard Holbrooke**: In the military, our contacts are pretty poor. On the civilian side, we -- the businessmen may know these people better. Hank Greenberg at AIG may know the next group of leaders better than the U.S. government, as he knew Zhu Rongji better. People like Lou Gerstner who have constant contacts and much more welcome in China, IBM, AIG. But we know these people, but we don't know who's going to emerge because the process is not very predictable. 

**Charlie Rose**: Deng Xiaoping as a human being -- short, 5 foot 2, yes? (shorter than you.) Yeah, well, that's about a foot shorter than me. But he was -- what wa he like? What did he do? What did he talk about? Because we know Zhou Enlai had Western ideas and listened, it is said, maybe apocryphally, to Western --

**Richard Holbrooke**: Zhou Enlai was ultimate sophisticated, urbane, cosmopolitan leader. Deng Xiaoping gave a much rougher edge and he was underestimated by the West at first. Henry Kissinger once famously called him "a nasty little man" and had to retract his statements when he realized that Deng would rank higher in history than Zhou Enlai, which nobody would have realized. Deng didn't like small talk, at least not in my conversations with him. I once gave him a children's book for his grandchildren. He kind of didn't even look at it, handed it to an aide and said, "Well, let's get back to talking about the state-of-the-art semiconductors for China." Deng, of course, was famously a man who had suffered. His son had been thrown out of a second-story window during the Cultural Revolution and is a paraplegic to this day. He himself had had to wear a dunce cap and was marched through the streets, had to repudiate himself and confess to that most terrible of "Capitalist Roader" crimes. He was a bridge player, which was the worst thing imaginable in Cultural Revolution times in China. And by the time he reached power in his mid-'70s, he was in a rush. He was angry for revenge and he had his picture of China to rise up form its triple humiliations -- from the Western powers, from the Japanese and from its own civil war and from the Cultural Revolution -- four problems. He saw it all and that vision, China's destiny, sustained him. But he -- he had a strategic grasp which was unbelievable. (How did he ) But he was --  tough. He was so tough. And again, I repeat this because it's central to my understanding of this extraordinary person. He believed life was a struggle and he did not see it in the same human terms as we would. 

**Charlie Rose**: Did he like, admire, or did it care what he felt about the United States? 

**Richard Holbrooke**: He admire our technology. (Just our technology?) These were the most modern toys. But he -- I think, like almost every Chinese, senior Chinese I'm aware of, he thinks we're kind of politically (Naive?) and socially backward, but that we are technologically advanced. 

**Charlie Rose**: Did he fear the Japanese because of their technology?

**Richard Holbrooke**: His attitude to the Japanese was hard to understand. He didn't like them, but he knew he had to work with them. His attitude towards the Russia went back and forth, from periods of great anger to periods where he wanted to work with them. It was only the Vietnamese who really got him angry. Why? Because Vietnam, a small, little country by Chinese standards, that should have been part of a larger Chinese empire, in his mind, kept sticking it to the Chinese. And that's why in January of 1979 he launched this punitive war against the Vietnamese, destroyed the northern 40 miles of Vietnam, but in the end, failed in his mission. It was great setback for him. (And in the end, his legacy is that). He opened China. His legacy is simple. He changed the history of China and thereby Asia and thereby the world. But his central legacy was bringing a billion Chinese into the modern world. But he was flawed, like so many great leaders. Tibet is another huge problem. But -- history will record him as the -- and I want to -- this may surprise you. History will record him, not Mao and not Zhou Enlai, as the most influential historical figure in Chinese 20th century history.  
